W-11350739-batch-aggregator-clarifications (#2265)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/batch-filters-and-batch-aggregator.adoc

> = Using Batch Processing Scopes

Author: Title change because this section covers more than the Step scope. Also, it does not cover every configuration of the scope but does talk about some uses and how to configure them. Not perfect or complete in terms of use cases, but I think this page should evolve into an Example/Use Case (big and small) page. 

Working on separate reference page that explains every configuration option. Some of the sections here and on other pages could/should actually be moved to that reference.

Reviewer: I think that the spirit of this section is describing what can be added to a batch step that is also batch specific (filters and aggregators). In that sense the original title seems to be accurate, because you are "refining" (in the sense of filtering and grouping) the batch records that the step processes. We can only talk about those two (filters and aggregators) and nothing else. Would use "Refining the Batch Steps record processing" instead (or something like that)

Author: "Refining" is just not a typical way to present this sort of info. Generally, in tech docs, we'd try to use the same term to keep things consistent, and that term is usually "configuring."

Regardless, more organization will be required. 

My goal here is to get the technical content accurate and to get the examples in place. After that, we'll make additional before merging this content.

> = Using Batch Processing Components

Author: ```suggestion
= Using Batch Processing Scopes
```

= Using Batch Processing Components
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: batch-aggregator-concept.adoc, filter-records-batch-faq.adoc

> You can refine the work that a batch step performs upon the records it processes.

Author: This section talked about only 2 of several topics on this page. So it needed to be made more comprehensive. In the HTML, the main topics will be H2s that will have links on the right side of the page, so it isn't necessary to detail each one here.

> You can set up and configure batch scopes to perform common batch processing use cases and to enhance the performance of batch jobs for cases in which the defaults require adjustment.

Author: ```suggestion
You can set up and configure Mule batch processing scopes to perform common batch processing use cases and to enhance the performance of batch jobs for cases in which the defaults require adjustment.
```

> = Using Batch Processing Scopes

Author: ```suggestion
= Configuring Batch Processing Scopes
```
```suggestion
= Using Batch Processing Scopes
```

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: batch-aggregator-concept.adoc, filter-records-batch-faq.adoc

> You can set up and configure Mule batch processing scopes to perform common batch processing use cases and to enhance the performance of batch jobs for cases in which the defaults require adjustment.

Reviewer: I think that we should stick to filter and aggregate here, that is, briefly state that you can configure the way a batch step will handle the records it gets from the stepping queue, allowing filtering and post processing aggregation.

Author: The issue here is that we are talking about more topics than filtering and aggregation on this page, so that info is misleading. So it doesn't make sense to mention only a subset of topics. And links to the topics will be visible in the right nav, so there is no reason to repeat them here. It's redundant.

Author: We can discuss this more, but I really need help with the technical issues mentioned below.

> You can set up and configure Mule batch processing scopes to perform common batch processing use cases and to enhance the performance of batch jobs for cases in which the defaults require adjustment.

Author: ```suggestion
Mule batch processing components are designed to manage bulk processing of records with minimal adjustments to their default settings. However, the scopes are highly configurable so that batch jobs meet specific processing and performance requirements. You can set up and configure Mule batch processing scopes to perform common batch processing use cases.
```

Author: @IvanAndresFritzler here's a revision of the intro paragraph

When a batch job instance exceeds its `maxFailedRecords` value, regardless of the filter set on the batch step, the step does not process any records and pushes the failed batch job instance to the On Complete phase. +
See xref:batch-error-handling-faq.adoc[Handling Errors During Batch Job] for more information.

> //TODO: WHAT WE'RE MISSING IS A REFERENCE THAT DESCRIBES FILTERS

Author: BTW, I'm working on a ref.

. Accept Policy
. Accept Expression

[[aggregator_bulk_update]]
== Performing Bulk Uploads from a Batch Aggregator Scope

> Aggregation is useful for bulk uploading one or more arrays of records to an external server, such as a database server. Within the Batch Aggregator scope, you can add an operation, such as a bulk update, insert, or upsert operation, to load the records in bulk, instead of running an operation separately on each record.

Author: ```suggestion
Aggregation is useful for bulk uploading one or more arrays of records to an external server, such as a database server. Within the Batch Aggregator scope, you can add an operation, such as a bulk update, insert, or upsert operation, to load one or more arrays of records to a server, instead of running an operation separately on each record.
```

. Accept Policy
. Accept Expression

[[aggregator_bulk_update]]
== Performing Bulk Uploads from a Batch Aggregator Scope

Aggregation is useful for bulk uploading multiple records within an array to an external server, such as a database server. Within the Batch Aggregator scope, you can add an operation, such as a bulk update, insert, or upsert operation, to load multiple records to a server with a single execution of an operation, instead of running an operation separately on each record.

> You can process records in separate arrays of a fixed size or stream a single array of records from the batch job instance. For example, you can configure a Bulk Update operation in the Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector) to update 200 processed records on a database server. Alternatively, you can stream all the records in the instance to the server. For information about configuring bulk operations for Database Connector, see xref:db-connector::database-execute-bulk.adoc[].

Author: TBD: We might need to use upsert bc later we talk about the ability to recover from failures when batch processing. Sounds like some operations might be able to process the arrays but not recover when there's a failure.

</batch:job>
----

> //TODO: NEED TO EXPLAIN THE FOLLOWING BULLET POINTS.

Author: TODO: Clarify the bullet points below:

Sequential access to records assumes the following:
. The aggregator size matches the number of aggregated records.
. There is a direct correlation between the aggregated records and the items in the list.

Sequential access to records assumes the following:

. The aggregator size matches the number of aggregated records.
. There is a direct correlation between the aggregated records and the items in the list.

> //TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record? Is that the index of the record

Author: QUESTION: see inline TODO

//TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record? Is that the index of the record

Author: Added question to issue #7 in W-11934285

</batch:job>
----

//TODO: NEED TO EXPLAIN THE FOLLOWING BULLET POINTS.
Sequential access to records assumes the following:

. The aggregator size matches the number of aggregated records.
. There is a direct correlation between the aggregated records and the items in the list.

=== Randomly Accessing Records within a Batch Aggregator

> //TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record?

Author: //TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record?
//Is that number the index of the record in the list, or what?

</batch:job>
----

//TODO: NEED TO EXPLAIN THE FOLLOWING BULLET POINTS.
Sequential access to records assumes the following:

. The aggregator size matches the number of aggregated records.
. There is a direct correlation between the aggregated records and the items in the list.

=== Randomly Accessing Records within a Batch Aggregator

//TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record?
//Is that number the index of the record in the list, or what?

> You can also use the For Each scope when randomly accessing records by their iteration number. For Each exposes a `records` variable, which is an immutable list that For Each uses to keep track of the iteration. You can use this variable to randomly access records in the list from the Batch Aggregator scope.

Author: If the list is immutable, how is it that we can modify the records in the list? Can the records be mutable even though the list isn't?

Author: The original says this when talking about sequential access to records:

> The foreach scope exposes a `records` variable. This variable is an *immutable list* used by foreach to keep track of the iteration and provides a random access list that is accessible across the batch aggregator.

But the example change the values of the records.

Later in the original, when talking about random access to records, it says this:

> You can also access random records by specifying the iteration number of the foreach, saving you the need to iterate through all records. +
> The foreach scope exposes a `records` variable. This variable is an *immutable list* used by foreach to keep track of the iteration and provides a random access list that is accessible across the batch aggregator.

But the example change the values of the records.

</batch:job>
----

//TODO: NEED TO EXPLAIN THE FOLLOWING BULLET POINTS.
Sequential access to records assumes the following:

. The aggregator size matches the number of aggregated records.
. There is a direct correlation between the aggregated records and the items in the list.

//TODO: HOW WOULD ANYONE KNOW THE "iteration number" of the record? Is that the index of the record
// in the list, or what?
You can also use the For Each scope when randomly accessing records by their iteration number.
For Each exposes a `records` variable, which is an immutable list that For Each uses to keep track of the iteration. You can use this variable to randomly access records in the list from the Batch Aggregator scope.

To demonstrate random access when using fixed-size aggregation, the following example specifies the index of a record in the For Each list of records. Instead of sequentially accessing each record, using the `records` variable with an index of a record selects a single record from the list. The example uses the Scripting module to modify the payload of the selected record and creates a variable for that record:

> [source,xml,linenums]

Author: TODO: We need to test and clarify this example, and we shouldn't use "foo":

```
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<batch:job jobName="batchJob">
	<batch:process-records>
		<batch:step name="batchStep">
			<batch:aggregator doc:name="batchAggregator" size="10">
				<foreach doc:name="For Each">
					<script:execute engine="groovy">
			    	<script:code>
			        	records[0].vars['marco'] = 'polo'
				        records[0].vars['record'].payload = 'hello'
			    	</script:code>
					</script:execute>
				</foreach>
			</batch:aggregator>
		</batch:step>
	</batch:process-records>
</batch:job>
----
```

					<script:execute engine="groovy">
			    	<script:code>
			        	records[0].vars['marco'] = 'polo'

> 				        records[0].vars['record'].payload = 'hello'

Author: no "foo" allowed. :)

</batch:job>
----

Using random access, you can change a record's payload at any given index position in the commit block.

> ==== Considerations for Defining a Block Size

Author: MOVED, not edited: This entire section was just moved to a new location on the page without edits because it was not related to the aggregator:
==== Considerations for Defining a Block Size

> You can configure a Batch Aggregator scope to stream its content. Setting aggregator to stream the records (`streaming="true"`) enables you to process an array of all the records in the job instance without running out of memory, no matter how many or how large the records are. For example, if you need to write millions of records to a CSV file, you can process the records as a streaming batch aggregator.

Author: ```suggestion
You can configure a Batch Aggregator scope to stream its content. Setting this scope to stream the records (`streaming="true"`) enables you to process an array of all the records in the job instance without running out of memory, no matter how many or how large the records are. For example, if you need to write millions of records to a CSV file, you can stream the records with the Batch Aggregator scope.
```

</batch:job>
----

> You can modify the records in the stream. However, only sequential access to records is possible when streaming within the aggregator. Random access is not supported when streaming because record payloads for random access are exposed as an `ImmutableList`. Streaming through an aggregator requires access to the entire set of records. Without a fixed size. Mule cannot guarantee that all records will fit in memory.

Author: ```suggestion
You can modify the records in the stream. However, only sequential access to records is possible when streaming within the Batch Aggregator scope. Random access is not supported when streaming because streaming requires access to the entire set of records. Without a fixed size, Mule cannot guarantee that all records will fit in memory.  Payloads for random access are exposed as an `ImmutableList`. 
```

</batch:job>
----

To learn more about processing within the Batch Aggregation scope and how aggregation differs from processing within the Batch Step scope, see xref:batch-processing-concept.adoc#phase_process[Process Phase].

Streaming Tips:

* Streaming from SaaS providers: In general, you are unlikely to use batch streaming when sending data through an Anypoint Connector to a SaaS provider, such as Salesforce, because SaaS providers often have restrictions on accepting streaming input.

* Batch streaming is often useful in batch processing when writing to a file such as CSV, JSON, or XML.

* Batch streaming and performance: Batch streaming affects the performance of your application because the array of records is stored in RAM, which can slow the pace at which transactions process. Though performance slows, the trade-off of streaming data can warrant using it in your implementation.

* Batch streaming and access to items: The biggest drawback to using batch streaming is the limitation on access to the items in the output. A fixed-size commit provides an unmodifiable list of records,

> //TODO: IS "an unmodifiable" correct here or is it "a modifiable"

Author: //TODO: IS "an unmodifiable" correct here or is it "a modifiable"
//TODO: What do we mean by "commit" here? as in "fixed-size commit" and "streaming
//commit". Should we use that term? Could we use a different term if we wanted? If ////so, what term?

//TODO: What do we mean by "commit" here? as in "fixed-size commit" and "streaming
//commit". Should we use that term? Could we use a different term if we wanted? If ////so, what term?
which enables you to access and process the items iteratively using one or more processors within the aggregator. A streaming commit is a one-read, forward-only iterator, which means that only one processor in the aggregator can read and process the input to the aggregator. However, you can use a scope like For Each with multiple processors within it because For Each maintains its own list of records.

//TODO: WHAT WE'RE MISSING IS A REFERENCE THAT DESCRIBES EACH SCOPES
Batch aggregator characteristics:

* The Batch Aggregator scope is an optional component that you can add to a Batch Step component. Only one aggregator per step is allowed. Aggregation is available only in the Process phase of a batch job instance and in no other phase.

> //TODO: WHAT DOES THIS MEAN? "can only wrap the final element ..."

Author: //TODO: WHAT DOES THIS MEAN? "can only wrap the final element ...

* An aggregator can only wrap the final element within the batch step in which it resides.
* Many connectors provide operations that can handle record-level errors without causing an entire batch aggregation process to fail.

> //TODO: Which Salesforce and which NetSuite connectors?

Author: //TODO: Which Salesforce and which NetSuite connectors?

An example is `upsert` in the Salesforce and NetSuite connectors.
+
At runtime, the connectors with these operations keep track of which records that the target resource accepts successfully and which fail to upsert. Rather than failing a complete group of records, the connector upserts as many records as it can and tracks any failures for notification.
+

> //TODO: TELLING PEOPLE TO CHECK THE CONNECTOR DOCS ISN'T A GREAT OPTION.

Author: //TODO: TELLING PEOPLE TO CHECK THE CONNECTOR DOCS ISN'T A GREAT OPTION.

To make sure that the connector you are using supports record-level errors, check the connector's documentation.

> //TODO: NEED TO EDIT AND POINT TO INFORMATION ABOUT TRANSACTIONS

Author: //TODO: NEED TO EDIT AND POINT TO INFORMATION ABOUT TRANSACTIONS

Author: //OR EXPLAIN THAT CONCEPT MORE HERE

</batch:job>
----

You can modify the records in the stream. However, only sequential access to records is possible when streaming within the aggregator. Random access is not supported when streaming because record payloads for random access are exposed as an `ImmutableList`. Streaming through an aggregator requires access to the entire set of records. Without a fixed size. Mule cannot guarantee that all records will fit in memory.

[source,xml,linenums]

> ----

Author: TODO: We also need to test and clarify how this example works, and we shouldn't use "foo":

```
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<batch:job jobName="batchJob">
	<batch:process-records>
		<batch:step name="batchStep">
			<batch:aggregator doc:name="batchAggregator" size="10">
				<foreach doc:name="For Each">
					<script:execute engine="groovy">
			    	<script:code>
			        		vars['marco'] = 'polo'
					        vars['record'].payload = 'hello'
			    	</script:code>
					</script:execute>
				</foreach>
			</batch:aggregator>
		</batch:step>
	</batch:process-records>
</batch:job>
----
```

By setting this attribute, Mule automatically maintains each record's media type and knows that the payload actually represents a JSON document.

> == Changing the Record Block Size

Author: This section was moved, but only the XML example at the very end was edited/corrected. Likely needs additional editing work in the future. 

Moved because it was talking about block sizes for the Batch Job scope, _not_ the Size attribute of the Batch Aggregator. However, it did mistakenly have an XML example with a size setting on the aggregator. That was replaced because it didn't belong.
